Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So today we carry on thinking about integrals and we
NOTE CONF
will see some other applications of integrals.
Not next week is an independent learning week, but the
NOTE CONF
week after we will see even more applications of integrals.
But today I think that the main point that we
NOTE CONF
want to talk about is this idea of the Riemann
sums.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look what we can say.
So we have had conversations about how historically the integral
NOTE CONF
came about, because we wanted to calculate the area between
a curve and the x axis.
NOTE CONF
And we also said that we did this by approximation.
Originally we wanted to approximate, if you like, the area
NOTE CONF
one is a little bit less and one is a
little bit more, and then we do a limiting process
NOTE CONF
to see what happens.
So this idea is what is behind this idea of
NOTE CONF
the Riemann sums.
The in your textbook on page five and 19 the
NOTE CONF
Riemann sums are defined on a.
So if I have a closed interval a and b
NOTE CONF
and p is a regular partition of MP, f is
defined on this closed interval, then the delta x is
NOTE CONF
the width of each subinterval.
And I define the Riemann sum as that as the
NOTE CONF
sum for I that goes one to an f of
x I star delta x I.
NOTE CONF
The thing.
The only thing that we need to take care when
NOTE CONF
we do exercises involving the Riemann sums, is to really
understand who all these symbols are.
NOTE CONF
So in the case of the formula, The xy star
is a point in the interval x I minus 1XI.
NOTE CONF
A is a regular partition, and we said last time
that the regular partition means that A is partitioned in
NOTE CONF
segments which are all the same length, right?
So for each segment the length x I minus 1XI
NOTE CONF
minus x I minus one is the same for each
I.
NOTE CONF
That's what it means to be a regular partition.
And then we define delta x to be one over
NOTE CONF
n b minus a.
And we can do that because this is a regular
NOTE CONF
partition okay.
So all the n segments have the same length.
NOTE CONF
This is the the definition which is in your book.
Now if and and we can talk about Riemann sums
NOTE CONF
for functions in general.
What we want to say is that if x is
NOTE CONF
continuous and non-negative in a b, then and that is
the Riemann sum for for f, then the area under
NOTE CONF
the curve is the limit of that sum that defines
the limit sum.
NOTE CONF
So basically I am saying that if f of x
is positive, you remember why I say it is positive.
NOTE CONF
Because last time we saw what happens if x if
the function is under the x axis, we need to
NOTE CONF
do something about it.
We'll see more about this next week.
NOTE CONF
But so if f is positive, then I say that
the area is the limit for the goes to infinity
NOTE CONF
of that sum.
So this is all more or less what there is
NOTE CONF
to know about Riemann sums.
And let us see whether we can do some questions.
NOTE CONF
Let me just.
There you are.
NOTE CONF
Oh come on.
Ah, excellent.
NOTE CONF
So let's see whether we can do some questions.
Some of them will concern Riemann sums.
NOTE CONF
The first ones will concern some applications of integrals.
And so let's do this one.
NOTE CONF
Please log in and then let me switch it off.
Well that's interesting.
NOTE CONF
17.
Oh!
NOTE CONF
So you are right.
Why not?
NOTE CONF
Okay, a few more people want to vote.
For me.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
We are nearly there.
There are in my car.
NOTE CONF
In the calculation of Woohoo club, there are 113 33
people logged in.
NOTE CONF
I've got 115 replies.
I think I can be happy with that.
NOTE CONF
There are hundred and 34 now.
Okay, so somebody that speaks to me in favour of
NOTE CONF
the fact that.
That somebody that goes with the general consensus that that
NOTE CONF
is false.
Somebody that can tell me why this is the case
NOTE CONF
or what they think is the case.
So.
NOTE CONF
I'm not looking at you, but you can say if
you want.
NOTE CONF
No.
So what do we think?
NOTE CONF
Why is that the case?
That's on top of the business problem.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
Can I it's false.
You can.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Basically because you have to integrate twice, you have a
NOTE CONF
constant that you can't find.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
So what is happening here?
I have something which so in a kind of this
NOTE CONF
is not in a formal way.
We would see the formal, the, the formal solution of
NOTE CONF
the exercise in a minute.
But the way in which we think about this exercise
NOTE CONF
is, is the following.
I have yes, I am given the acceleration a of
NOTE CONF
t, and I am given one condition.
I'm given the velocity at the origin to be zero.
NOTE CONF
Now, the way I think about the acceleration is this.
Variation, like the change of space with respect to time
NOTE CONF
is the velocity and the change of velocity with respect
to time is acceleration.
NOTE CONF
So I am doing two derivatives here right?
If you start from your space, this means that I
NOTE CONF
need to have two conditions in order to be able
to find out exactly what is the point that I'm
NOTE CONF
looking for.
In this case, I've got only one.
NOTE CONF
I only know what happens in v equal zero.
So ideally I would like to know what happens in
NOTE CONF
the s of zero.
So in the initial moment where is in the space
NOTE CONF
the point and so on.
This is like a way an intuitive way of thinking
NOTE CONF
about this, which is exactly what you were saying.
Now if I wanted to write this down properly and
NOTE CONF
don't forget intuition is very important.
But ultimately we need to be able to write down
NOTE CONF
things in mathematical language.
How would I write this down?
NOTE CONF
I would say, okay.
I know that a of t is dv dt, and
NOTE CONF
so v of t is the integral of t.
And this is an indefinite Integral and the solution contains
NOTE CONF
an arbitrary constant.
We have seen this last time, right?
NOTE CONF
Now I cannot find this contrast, this constant.
And in fact, suppose that I take these two, these
NOTE CONF
80 equal equal t square plus one.
So I choose an 80.
NOTE CONF
And for an for v of zero we have c
one equal to one.
NOTE CONF
But I could just choose another function.
Which has the same properties with a different constant.
NOTE CONF
And I would find that the point is in a
different place.
NOTE CONF
So this is the idea right?
The data in my in my exercise are not enough
NOTE CONF
to be able to tell me exactly what is the
point at the time.
NOTE CONF
T.
And and you can show if you had the question
NOTE CONF
like this, you could argue first intuitively to say that
I am doing two derivatives now, but you could also
NOTE CONF
show it in this way by showing a control example
and say, well, I have this function that satisfies the
NOTE CONF
properties, and I have this function and the points end
up in different places.
NOTE CONF
So what you need to do, you need to take
functions with different constants.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is the this is often a good way
NOTE CONF
to think about questions like this.
So if you want to show that something is false
NOTE CONF
produced an example where that is false okay.
And that will be enough.
NOTE CONF
Or of course you can reason cannot deductively from what
we know from mathematics, but sometimes showing an example.
NOTE CONF
So if I ask you, is this true?
You can tell me, no, it is not true because
NOTE CONF
there is two functions that have the same like behave
like the exercise wants them to behave, and yet the
NOTE CONF
position of points end up being different.
Let's do one more.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but I am going to switch this off because
it's more fun when we don't see the results.
NOTE CONF
Is this the right one?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
So this.
NOTE CONF
Is.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's have one more minute.
Just a few more people to vote.
NOTE CONF
And then we have a look.
Back.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Wait.
NOTE CONF
There we are.
So I am somewhat delighted that nobody picked two.
NOTE CONF
Why?
Two is wrong.
NOTE CONF
Who can tell me why?
Two is totally wrong and we are not even thinking
NOTE CONF
about it.
So why is not the average velocity in one minute?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Sorry I was looking past you.
NOTE CONF
Because by integrating velocity, we're going to get distance or
displacement.
NOTE CONF
If you wanted the average, you would have to divide
Bye bye.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Bye.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So that's definitely not.
NOTE CONF
I also don't want to say the four is correct
because there is four is not correct because there is
NOTE CONF
a right answer there.
So why do we think the majority of the people
NOTE CONF
that have voted between 3 and 1 think that that
is the total distance in one minute?
NOTE CONF
Why do we think that?
And why is not this distance from the starting point?
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Because of the because of the modulus.
NOTE CONF
There's no, uh, so because of the modulus, there's no,
like, direction.
NOTE CONF
So it's just, uh, it'd be like measuring speed, which
is.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
Just got magnitude.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
So this is exactly a point.
NOTE CONF
And this is something that is important to keep in
mind when you read questions.
NOTE CONF
Just try to think about things out there.
In this case, why do I get a module right.
NOTE CONF
Why do I want the model of V of T.
Because that is, the total distance of the sprinter is
NOTE CONF
not the distance from the starting point.
So if I wanted to formalise this, what would I
NOTE CONF
say?
So C.
NOTE CONF
Would be the distance the displacement in one minute and
therefore would have no module.
NOTE CONF
Like you were saying just now.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Whilst B for the average velocity I would have to
divide by 16 number of seconds in a minute or
NOTE CONF
some unit, but the average implies some sort of account
of average.
NOTE CONF
So you need to know what you have divided the
length of the in this.
NOTE CONF
In this case I think the time division of your
time unit okay.
NOTE CONF
Therefore what we need is the total distance of the
sprinter in one minute.
NOTE CONF
So next one.
Wait.
NOTE CONF
A.
Minute.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there's no unit.
That's all right this minute.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
Just a minute.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Why not?
NOTE CONF
So when you have questions like this, just think about.
So this is obviously a question about the rate of
NOTE CONF
change of something.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So think about what is changing and in which direction
is the change.
NOTE CONF
Is there any more clear.
All.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Are.
NOTE CONF
There any.
Other questions?
NOTE CONF
Like that.
Thank you for that.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have a look.
Okay, so that's pretty.
NOTE CONF
Pretty much a big vote of confidence for the first
question.
NOTE CONF
So what?
The reason why I say some I said what I
NOTE CONF
said before is because in this case, we need to
think about that.
NOTE CONF
Is the volume of water inside the tank, which is
whatever this water is, which is changing.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And the amount of water in the tank is negative.
NOTE CONF
So the change will be negative.
It's not the case of a velocity that's increasing.
NOTE CONF
In this case the change is decreasing.
So why.
NOTE CONF
That is the answer.
Who can tell me why that's the answer.
NOTE CONF
And then we will see why the other ones cannot
cannot be the answer.
NOTE CONF
What do we think.
Why the change is given by the integral.
NOTE CONF
Right Thank you.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
What?
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
It's a big room.
Not very quick.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So why is that integral?
NOTE CONF
The function that we're given measures the rate of, um,
water falling out, or the rate at which water falls
NOTE CONF
out of the, um, pipe.
And to measure the actual amount of, um, the amount
NOTE CONF
of water that has fallen out of the pipe.
Um, we'll need to integrate it because, um, integrating it
NOTE CONF
will give us the function of just how much water
has been or all has come out of the pipe.
NOTE CONF
So would you be able to say why?
For example, the second one is not right.
NOTE CONF
If you don't want to say it, just say no.
But because that just gives you.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Actually, what does that give you?
NOTE CONF
That's all right.
I can show.
NOTE CONF
You.
Okay, so this is of course, correct what you said.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look why that is true and
why the rest is not.
NOTE CONF
Ah.
So.
NOTE CONF
First of all, thank you to the comments that one
of your colleagues gave.
NOTE CONF
I have ignored units or measures here, which is very
sloppy of me.
NOTE CONF
The time should have some unit of measure.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In the context of this exercise, it doesn't really matter,
but just for good mathematical writing.
NOTE CONF
That should be the case.
Okay, so let's have a look at what happens.
NOTE CONF
So.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
This is the formalisation of what you were saying before
right.
NOTE CONF
What I am looking at is the rate of change
of the water coming out of wherever the water was.
NOTE CONF
And I want to calculate this.
So the change of volume of the water is decreasing,
NOTE CONF
okay.
Because the water is coming out of whatever, whatever it
NOTE CONF
was.
And so I can say that the water collected between
NOTE CONF
two times, which is called DBC.
So the water collected between the times one and the
NOTE CONF
time two.
I don't know how you want to call them would
NOTE CONF
be given by that.
And by the net change theorem we have that integral.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is pretty straightforward.
NOTE CONF
The only thing that we had to think about when
we have Problems of this sort.
NOTE CONF
We want to think about like the modelling, what is
actually happening.
NOTE CONF
They are not all the same.
This is fun.
NOTE CONF
Let's do this one.
I just don't.
NOTE CONF
Understand why.
Not exactly a.
NOTE CONF
Year from.
Now.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we have a look.
So this exercise is once you understand how to apply
NOTE CONF
the formula, are all about understanding who are the main
character in that formula.
NOTE CONF
So are questions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So why is that the answer?
Let's have a look at this worked out properly.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
So this is the formula that we use right.
NOTE CONF
For the approximation of the area under the curve.
And we have seen this in the introduction.
NOTE CONF
This is Riemann sums.
So in order to do exercises like this I just
NOTE CONF
need to really understand what is that x.
Who is f of x I, I would suggest when
NOTE CONF
you do exercises involving the Riemann, the Riemann sums, that
you make yourself a kind of a table of who
NOTE CONF
are all these, these things.
So in my case f of x is my function,
NOTE CONF
is e to the x and the interval where I
want to calculate the approximation is zero three okay.
NOTE CONF
Delta x in this case is three to the n
is three over n.
NOTE CONF
Because on the top I would have to have b
minus a by a.
NOTE CONF
In this case is equal to zero is the origin
and so is three over n and x I.
NOTE CONF
Where will be a plus delta x times y is
three over n delta x times I.
NOTE CONF
Once you have sorted this out then you know the
formula.
NOTE CONF
And this is exactly the answer.
Okay, so this exercise is once you kind of have
NOTE CONF
your understanding that I am doing an approximation of area,
and I calculate the approximation in this way.
NOTE CONF
There are really all about understanding who the delta x
the xi the extremes are.
NOTE CONF
So I want to do another one like this that
we are going to be.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be really fun.
So what about this one?
NOTE CONF
Why is he doing that?
I don't know.
NOTE CONF
How?
But.
NOTE CONF
I.
Just.
NOTE CONF
Want.
To take.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I need a few more votes.
Come on.
NOTE CONF
Not a lot of people voted.
For you.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have a look because I've got other questions
I want to to see.
NOTE CONF
So the answer is of course four.
So my first question is what are these expressions then.
NOTE CONF
And what do they tell me the same thing.
Can anybody tell me what are these two expressions.
NOTE CONF
Somebody that bought it both needs to have an idea
of what this expression represents.
NOTE CONF
What are they.
Going to.
NOTE CONF
What?
Why?
NOTE CONF
They're both.
They're both the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Well, the difference is that the second includes the zero
term and the first doesn't.
NOTE CONF
And the zero term will equal to zero, so the
sum doesn't.
NOTE CONF
So we call them the um limit using the right
hand point and the limit using the left hand point.
NOTE CONF
So if you have read your chapter about uh, for
today, you will, you will have seen that I can
NOTE CONF
write the Riemann sum using the right hand point or
the left hand point.
NOTE CONF
So I start from different places a little bit.
So the picture you need to have in your head,
NOTE CONF
which is not the true representation of what is going
on, it's just an image to to help you is
NOTE CONF
the same thing as if I wanted to calculate an
area.
NOTE CONF
Of something like this.
And I couldn't do integrals.
NOTE CONF
I could go from the bottom.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And then approximate.
Or I could overshoot.
NOTE CONF
That's the picture.
So you go from both sides.
NOTE CONF
Now this is not quite what happened with the Riemann
sums, but the idea is the same.
NOTE CONF
So this represents the same thing.
So let's have a look at what they represent.
NOTE CONF
The same thing.
How do I calculate them.
NOTE CONF
And so on.
First of all one point about what the exercise is
NOTE CONF
asking you.
So despite the fact that we have said that historically,
NOTE CONF
we think about Riemann sums to calculate areas under curves.
The exercise is not asking you for an area.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Would you agree with me?
NOTE CONF
So in this case the outcome of this limit may
be negative and that would be fine.
NOTE CONF
It's like when you have an integral which is negative.
We will see next week a little bit more in
NOTE CONF
details.
Else.
NOTE CONF
But we have also mentioned this is on Monday.
When you are requested to find an area, then you
NOTE CONF
need to think about the sign.
When you are requested to calculate some integral or some
NOTE CONF
limit and so on.
Then we take whatever sign that comes.
NOTE CONF
But just to show you.
That curve.
NOTE CONF
Looks like this.
So that's the function that we have in the integral.
NOTE CONF
And that is the um what it looks like.
And it has a minimum there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And you said no.
NOTE CONF
If I had asked you for the area, then my
thinking would be different because there is a part of
NOTE CONF
the curve which is under the x axis.
So I would have to think about the sine of
NOTE CONF
that.
But this exercise is only asking you for the limit
NOTE CONF
of the Riemann sum.
It's like if I was asking you for the integral
NOTE CONF
between 0 and 4 of that curve.
But in any case, I think it is sure was
NOTE CONF
positive to try to make yourself a picture.
Even if you want to go on Desmos and ask
NOTE CONF
Desmos to make yourself a picture.
So don't want to work out maximum, minimum, and so
NOTE CONF
on.
Which is useful because you will do this later on
NOTE CONF
in the course.
But so this is my function.
NOTE CONF
Now suppose that I want to calculate the using rate
and points okay.
NOTE CONF
When I use right hand points by convention I start
my sums from one.
NOTE CONF
So I say that my integral is the limit of
I that goes from one to n of that expression.
NOTE CONF
If you go in with all the items that we
have seen before, this is exactly what you get.
NOTE CONF
And the limit is calculated by finding what the by
knowing what the sum for I to n of a
NOTE CONF
I square m from I from one to n on
I is.
NOTE CONF
You should know these things from school, but we will
have also.
NOTE CONF
There will be a unit later on which is about
things like this.
NOTE CONF
So that is my calculation.
So then I go and solve that limit.
NOTE CONF
And sorry, I'm not quite sure what's happened.
And that's what I find.
NOTE CONF
Okay fine.
We know about limits.
NOTE CONF
We've done it last week.
So this is what they found.
NOTE CONF
Now suppose that I am not satisfied.
And I want you to calculate the Riemann sum from
NOTE CONF
the left hand.
From the left hand point.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If I wanted to do that, then that sum would
NOTE CONF
start from zero and would be the sum from I
from zero to n minus one.
NOTE CONF
Now what is the thing I need to to be
one minute?
NOTE CONF
Careful if I want to do this calculation.
I mean I can plug in the formula like I
NOTE CONF
did before.
I've got the delta X and all this kind of
NOTE CONF
stuff.
Well I don't know what that is.
NOTE CONF
What do I need to be careful about.
What do you think?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Is it that.
NOTE CONF
The function needs to be continuous?
Otherwise the right and left endpoints won't approximate to the
NOTE CONF
same thing?
Yes, but we know that the function is continuous because
NOTE CONF
we actually have the the actual expression of the function.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
In this not in this case, but there is a
NOTE CONF
general consideration I need to think about.
Well, no, but a little bit more general than that,
NOTE CONF
but not completely general.
What could that be?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So but if you want to apply this formula and
NOTE CONF
you wanted to calculate the the other Riemann sum.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is the something that I said before.
And obviously when we do this exercise, it's actually it's
NOTE CONF
always a good idea to go and check.
Take one minute to do this integral, okay?
NOTE CONF
And if your limit is different from this integral then
you need to worry about.
NOTE CONF
But in this case it's fine.
That's the limit.
NOTE CONF
Now what I want to draw your attention on is
that in order to calculate this limit, I have put
NOTE CONF
into my expression the value of the sum for.
I then goes from to n I and I square.
NOTE CONF
These sums are calculated in.
In order to have that sum, the the index needs
NOTE CONF
to go from one to n.
So what happens if the index goes from zero to
NOTE CONF
n minus one.
So you cannot just plug this in when you calculate
NOTE CONF
the left hand side the left point right.
You need to think about what happens to the sum.
NOTE CONF
And it's not too difficult actually to think about this
because what you do.
NOTE CONF
Is this you take the formula that you know, when
you have the sum from from one to n and
NOTE CONF
you replace n minus one instead of n, because this
time your sum in between 0 and -1 and the
NOTE CONF
formula slightly changes, as you can see there.
So in the in the first two formulas you replace
NOTE CONF
n minus n with n minus one.
You obtain the formulas at the bottom, and then these
NOTE CONF
are the formulas you use to put in the limits
to calculate the left hand points.
NOTE CONF
So to recap, when we do exercises of this sort
and you look at summations on the natural numbers, the
NOTE CONF
point where you start and the point where you stop
are important.
NOTE CONF
So if you just replace in the left hand point
calculation, the sum, the value of the sum from one
NOTE CONF
to n, you would have been a bit in trouble.
But if you do this, then you can do all
NOTE CONF
your calculations.
I've done them.
NOTE CONF
It works.
You take exactly the same value, which is what you
NOTE CONF
wanted, because you are taking a limit from basically from
an overshoot and an undershoot of some approximation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I think we have time for one more.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look.
What time is it?
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Gosh.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Quickly.
NOTE CONF
Very quickly.
Let's try to do this.
NOTE CONF
We got four minutes.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in the last minute and a half of the
lecture because then I need to let you go.
NOTE CONF
We have said in the course of commenting on the
exercise before that that must be true.
NOTE CONF
Right.
That two expressions limits to the same value, because the
NOTE CONF
two expressions, the limit of that expression under the right
conditions, of course, the function is continuous and is defined
NOTE CONF
in the integral in the interval and all that.
The limit is the integral and the integral is one
NOTE CONF
integral.
So these two limiting processes needs to to be going
NOTE CONF
to the same place.
So it doesn't matter in the end.
NOTE CONF
If I go right and point to the left hand
point, if I then take the limit, because that is
NOTE CONF
going to give me the integral.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'll see, you know, independent learning week next week.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So see you Monday Monday next week.
All.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
Oh, wait.
NOTE CONF
We can always, uh.
Wait wait wait.
NOTE CONF
We can always, uh, uh, interview as, uh, for me
as a form of submission.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, so you guys, the reason is, uh.
So.
NOTE CONF
When we calculate the stream of funds, we find the
songs that have known songs.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So then it's interesting to see how this changes people
NOTE CONF
in the rest of the world, because the approximation is
quite different.
NOTE CONF
The price of this is not just to raise awareness,
they just use that term.
NOTE CONF
And if you have different information and I mean, in
this particular exercise, because of the function that it will
NOTE CONF
give the points and the intervals.
The theorem works out that we use these two sums,
NOTE CONF
but there may be others.
They use other things.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It is just something to show that there needs to
NOTE CONF
be room for all of it.
That's okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Hello there.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this one was very nice for everybody, but.
I think not.
NOTE CONF
The whole, of course, is the result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Excuse me.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Okay.